authors.md, before:

## About the Authors
---


### Current Contributors

[Colin Ophus](http://foundry.lbl.gov/people/colin_ophus.html) is currently a research scientist at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM) at Lawrence Berkeley National Labs in Berkeley, California. He can be contacted via email at clophus@lbl.gov.

[Luis Rangel DaCosta](http://foundry.lbl.gov/) is a student in the Department of Materials Science at University of Michigan. Luiz is currently a Summer Undergraduate Laboratory Intern (SULI) at the Molecular Foundry, Berkeley Lab. 




### Past Contributors

[AJ Pryor](https://www.linkedin.com/in/alan-pryor-02a52b57/) is a 5th year physics Ph.D. student in the [Coherent Imaging Group](http://www.physics.ucla.edu/research/imaging/) at UCLA. AJ is a data scientist and HPC software engineer, and he maintains [a blog](http://alanpryorjr.com/) about these and other topics. You can find some of his other software projects [on Github](https://github.com/apryor6), and he can be contacted via email at apryor6@gmail.com.

Commit message:

Prismatic v1.2 installation update; HDF5 format specifications; contact and author information update

authors.md, after:

## About the Authors
---


### Current Contributors

[Dr. Colin Ophus](http://foundry.lbl.gov/people/colin_ophus.html) is currently a research scientist at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM) at Lawrence Berkeley National Labs in Berkeley, California. He can be contacted via email at clophus@lbl.gov.

[Dr. Hamish Brown](https://scholar.google.com.au/citations?user=QN2mSeoAAAAJ&hl=en) is currently working as a Postdoctoral Researcher at the National Center for Electron Microscopy at Lawrence Berkeley.  Dr. Brown completed his Ph.D. in Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics at the University of Melbourne under the advisement of Prof. Les Allen, and a previous Postdoctoral appointment at the Monash University, Melbourne with Dr. Scott Findlay. His research interests include image simulation and retrieval of structural information in electron microscopy.

[Luis Rangel DaCosta](http://www.linkedin.com/in/lerandc/) is a student in the Department of Materials Science and in the School of Music, Theatre and Dance at the University of Michigan. Luis is currently working as a Summer Undergraduate Laboratory Intern (SULI) at the Molecular Foundry, Berkeley Lab, and can be contacted via email at lrangeldacosta@lbl.gov.


### Past Contributors

[AJ Pryor](https://www.linkedin.com/in/alan-pryor-02a52b57/) is a 5th year physics Ph.D. student in the [Coherent Imaging Group](http://www.physics.ucla.edu/research/imaging/) at UCLA. AJ is a data scientist and HPC software engineer, and he maintains [a blog](http://alanpryorjr.com/) about these and other topics. You can find some of his other software projects [on Github](https://github.com/apryor6), and he can be contacted via email at apryor6@gmail.com.
